.. _methods-overview:

Methods Overview
----------------

The EEmeter provides multiple methods for calculating energy savings. The most
conventional methods use weather normalization to calculate energy savings.
Fundamentally, this means that once a relationship between weather patterns
and energy consumption in a particular building is established, counterfactual
usage parameters can be used to calculate savings against a projected baseline.

These basic methods [#]_ are used in combination with
:ref:`energy modeling <glossary-energy-model>`,
which is described more precisely in :ref:`modeling-overview`.

As noted in the :ref:`background <background>` above, we term a set of consumption data points a
:ref:`trace <glossary-trace>`. A trace can be broken down into component periods used for calculating savings. Most
important is the baseline period. Baseline period consumption data is modeled
to establish the relationship between weather and consumption for a building
prior to an intervention. Different buildings will have different
relationships between their energy use and the weather. Some will be
relatively more insulated, others will be built differently, and others will
be exposed to light differently. These differences create a better or worse
fit between energy use and weather. Statistically, we will have higher
confidence in the savings estimate for a particular building when there is a
stronger, more consistent relationship with the weather.

Once we have calculated a weather model, we can apply that model to a sample
"normal" weather year. We understand what a typical house’s usage is relative
to the weather, but we don’t necessarily want to use the previous weather year
as our baseline (there may be some particular idiosyncrasies that we want to
avoid). By estimating consumption relative to an average year, we reduce the
likelihood of bias in the savings estimate.

If we have a full year of post-intervention data, we can replicate this
process for our reporting period. We calculate a new model for the
relationship between weather and consumption for our reporting period and
estimate consumption in the same "normal" year as our baseline. If the
intervention has resulted in lower energy use relative to the weather, the
output will show a reduction in consumption relative to the baseline. By
referencing the same "normal" year, we can be reassured that there are fewer
arbitrary factors influencing the results.

When there is not a full year of data for the reporting period, we can instead
turn to the actual consumption recorded at the meter for measuring savings.
We simply take the estimate generated by the baseline model and apply it to
the temperature for any point in the reporting period. We subtract the
consumption from the matching timestamp to generate the savings value.

When we measure savings using daily or hourly usage increments, additional
controls are required. For example, energy use on weekends is typically
systematically different than on weekdays and must be treated differently.
Likewise, overnight energy use looks very different than daytime energy use
even when weather conditions are the same. For these types of systematic
differences, we introduce a number of new methods. The most straightforward
is a "fixed-effects" method that takes into account the day of the week. This
and other modifications to the core method are designed to produce a more
accurate model for establishing a relationship between weather conditions and
energy usage, thus making our savings estimates more reliable.

---

To calculate gross :ref:`energy savings <glossary-energy-savings>`, the EEmeter
selects a sample of :ref:`trace <glossary-trace>` data prior to an
:ref:`intervention <glossary-intervention>` and
:ref:`weather-normalizes <glossary-weather-normalization>` it to establish
a :ref:`baseline <glossary-baseline>`, then calculates the difference
between :ref:`projected baseline energy demand <glossary-projected-baseline-energy-demand>`
and observed :ref:`energy demand <glossary-energy-demand>` following the
intervention.


:ref:`ZCTAs <glossary-zip-code-tabulation-area>`

.. [#] Additional information on *why* this method is used in preference to
   other methods is described in the introduction.
